Considere estes dois sistemas de coordenadas,
sistema A e sistema B. Eles são ambos sistemas de
coordenadas da mão direita.
E o problema que nós estamos tentando resolver é
como descrevemos a rotação do sistema B
em relação ao sistema A. Imagine que nós podemos
pegar o sistema A e rotacionar no espaço
para que seus eixos fossem paralelos ao
sistema B. Como fazemos isso?
Bem, um matemático muito famoso Suíço,
Leonhard Euler, apareceu com o chamado
Teorema da Rotação.
Ele afirma que dois sistemas tridimensionais
estão relacionados por uma sequência de
rotações elementares como aquelas
sobre o eixo x, o eixo y e o eixo z.
Não precisamos aplicar mais do que três,
mas as rotações nesta sequência precisam
ser sobre eixos diferentes; ou seja, giraríamos
sobre o eixo x, depois o eixo y, talvez
o eixo x novamente ou talvez sobre o eixo z.
Então qualquer rotação pode ser expressa em termos
de não mais que três rotações, desde que
estas três rotações são consecutivamente
sobre eixos diferentes.
Vamos demonstrar este Teorema da Rotação.
Aqui, eu tenho meu sistema de posição de referência e
aqui eu tenho um sistema de coordenadas que tem
uma orientação arbitrária no espaço.
Então, o Teorema de Rotação diz que eu posso
ser capaz de pegar este sistema de coordenadas e
com três simples rotações elementares
obter uma orientação como esta.
Então, eu vou pegar uma cópia daquele
sistema de posição de referência
E, a primeira coisa que eu vou fazer é
rotacioná-lo um pouco em torno do eixo x,
Depois, eu vou rotacionar ele um pouco
em torno do eixo y, e então eu vou
rotacionar um pouco em torno do eixo z.
E se eu pegar este eixo e colocá-lo aqui,
iremos ver que agora tem aproximadamente
a mesma orientação que o sistema
azul que comecei
Então, vamos anotar todas as sequências possíveis
de rotações, onde nós aplicamos esta ressalva de
não duas sucessivas rotações
sobre o mesmo eixo
Na verdade, há duas delas e eu escrevi
todas elas bem aqui.
Estas rotações se dividem em dois grupos e
o grupo mostrado aqui é conhecido como
ângulos de Euler.
E, são eles onde há duas rotações
sobre o mesmo eixo.
O primeiro é a rotação sobre o X, depois Y,
e depois, X novamente.
Bem, este outro aqui é Y, depois Z,
e depois, Y novamente.
Portanto, no grupo de ângulos de Euler, um determinado
eixo aparecerá duas vezes, mas nunca duas vezes consecutivas.
Este grupo em particular; rotação em torno de Z.
depois Y, e então em torno de Z é comumente
chamados de ângulos de Euler, mas, na verdade,
existem seis ângulos de Euller.
Logo, precisamos ser muito cautelosos quando
falamos sobre uma sequência angular.
Na verdade, não é suficiente dizer
somente ângulos de Euler.
Devemos ser muito específicos e
dizer ângulos ZYZ de Euler
Diferentes comunidades de engenharia usam diferentes
conversões, e a conversão ZYZ é bastante
comum em robótica e na aeroespacial, mas há
outras disciplinas de engenharia nas quais elas
use different conventions.
Be very, very careful when you just talk about
Euler angles.
Let’s experiment and here we’re talking
about ZYZ sequence Euler angles.
I’m going to use the Toolbox function eul2r,
which takes three angular arguments, the three
Euler angles.
And, I’m just going to give them simple
values: 0.1, 0.
2 and 0.3 radians respectively.
And, here is the resulting rotation matrix
that corresponds to the three Euler angles.
So you can think of this as two alternative
representations for orientation of the coordinate
frame.
We can represent it as a 3 by 3 orthogonal
matrix or we can represent it by three numbers
which are the Euler angles.
I can perform the inverse operation.
I can convert a rotation matrix to Euler angles.
To do that, I use the function tr2eul and
I pass in the rotation matrix which we’ve
just computed.
And here we have the Euler angles.
So I can convert Euler angles to a rotation
matrix, a rotation matrix back to Euler angles.
Let’s have a look at a slightly different
case where the middle Euler angle is a negative
number and the result is rotation matrix.
It’s a different rotation matrix to the
one we had before because it’s a different
set of Euler angles.
Now I’ll convert this rotation matrix back
to Euler angles.
And we’ll see that the Euler angles that
we end up with are not the Euler angles that
we started with.
So this is another important consideration
when we look at representing orientation in
terms of these three-angle sequences: that
they are not unique, but they are two different
sets of Euler angles which result in exactly
the same rotation matrix.
And just to verify that that is the case,
I’m going to convert this different set
of Euler angles to a rotation matrix.
I’m going to pass that answer in and we
can see the resulting rotation matrix.
And we can see that it is exactly the same
as this one here.
So there are two sets of Euler angles which
result in exactly the same orientation in
space, the same rotation matrix.
The other group of rotation sequences are
commonly called Cardan angles.
These are named after a very famous, or infamous,
Italian character who was a doctor, an astrologer
and a gambler and spent some time in jail
for heresy.
But a very, very inventive person, he invented
the combination lock and he invented the universal
joint, the thing that transmits torque from
an engine in the front of the car to the wheels
at the back of the car.
He also published widely on probability and
was one of the first people to solve cubic
and quartic polynomial equations.
So a very, very bright person.
The Cardan angles involve rotations around
different axes.
So no letter is repeated in the rotation sequence.
The two of them are often referred to as roll,
pitch and yaw angles.
That’s the sequence XYZ or the sequence
ZYX.
And which particular one is used as roll,
pitch, yaw angles depends a bit on the context
of the problem.
Roll, pitch, yaw angles are a really common
convention for orientation of bodies in three-dimensional
space.
We have the x-axis pointing forward and so
the roll angle is rotation around the x-axis.
So that’s the first rotation that we do.
Now we perform a rotation around the y-axis
and that’s referred to as pitch.
So that’s this sort of motion.
And then after that rotation, we do a rotation
around the z-axis and we refer to that as
yaw motion.
So roll, pitch, yaw description of attitude
is a rotation around the x-axis, then around
the y-axis, and then around the z-axis.
A way to demonstrate this principle of three
consecutive rotations is with this mechanism,
a thing called a Gimbal mechanism.
So, there are two coordinate frames here.
We have the world reference coordinate frame
here, the big red frame.
And, we have a smaller coordinate frame in
the middle here.
Now, we can make a rotation around the x-axis,
which is a motion like this.
We can rotate around the y-axis, which is
a rotation like this.
And, we can rotate around the z-axis.
So, I can put this inner coordinate frame
at any orientation that I like and the gimbals
will find the appropriate angles to allow
that to happen.
So this demonstrates very clearly shows that any
orientation of this inner frame can be achieved
by arbitrary choice of three rotation angles
around the x, y, and z-axis.
Let’s have a look at some roll, pitch, yaw
angles in practice.
This is a schematic diagram of NASA’s lunar
module from the late ’60s and early ’70s.
We can see the coordinate frames indicated
on here.
We can see that they define roll as rotation
around the z-axis which is toward the front
of the vehicle and they have defined yaw as
being around the x-axis which is the vertical
axis for this particular vehicle.
The MATLAB functions for roll, pitch, yaw
angles are very similar to those for Euler
angles.
We used the function rpy2r and we pass in
the roll, pitch, yaw angles.
I’ve just made up some simple numbers here.
The roll angle is 0.1
radians.
The pitch angle is 0.2 radians.
And the yaw angle is 0.3 radians.
And this is the resulting orthogonal rotation
matrix.
Once again, there is an inverse function.
So tr2rpy, and I pass in the rotation matrix
and the result are roll, pitch, yaw angles,
the same as those that I started with.